+++
title = "Rebetiko (I)"
description = "In which I introduce you to a very unsecret secret pleasure of mine: rebetika."
date = "2016-11-27T22:16:24+01:00"

+++
My friends know (and are duly horrified by the fact) that I have a bit
of a *faiblesse* for a rather strange musical genre: *rebetiko*. Lately,
some rebetika made it back into my daily playlists. So in this post I’ll
begin to tell you the story of my encounter with rebetiko. I’ll do it
backwards: today I’m going to tell you where I got; in a future post
I’ll tell you where I started from. (If you can’t wait that long, click
[here](https://youtu.be/fqW89c4vbBA?list=PLd2ehAknsn53rKqokJO5afKSRiPTfc1Jt)
for a clue.)

Rebetiko is a Greek musical genre (perhaps the word ‘tradition’
describes it better) whose roots are in the musical practice of the
suburban (and often interlope) Greek world at the turn of the 20th
century. What I like about it, at least in its pre-classical and
classical periods (that’s before and, respectively, during the 30s) is
the transparency of its eclectic nature. Rebetika draw heavily on the
Oriental (Asian) musical traditions. Indeed, initially, they are
*oriental* songs. Here’s a sample: Marika Papagika’s 1919 recording of
*Smyrneiko Minore*. (Funny, it was recorded in New York!)

{{< youtube Ux_whsihlM0 >}}

And here’s a modern take on the song, by Savina Yannatou:

{{< youtube M4ir0rK_ci8 >}}

It’s great fun to *listen* how this music evolves as it blends with the
European tradition - or at least with the European tradition of the
Southern Balkans. For instance, this is Vamvakaris’ take on the
traditional zeibekiko of Asia Minor in the 30s, during the Piraeus
period of rebetika:

{{< youtube if4SkbfCSvI >}}

As the years pass rebetika become more and more *European*. Listen, for
instance, to Mpellou (probably the greatest, wonderful*est*,
magnificent*est* voice in the past, present and future of rebetiko)
singing *Sinefiasmeni kiriaki*:

{{< youtube QR03kMVUZ9k >}}

(If you want to learn more about rebetiko, there’s a decent Wikipedia
[page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rebetiko) about it. Even better is
Gail Holst’s book [*Road to
rembetika*](https://www.amazon.com/Road-Rembetika-sub-culture-sorrow-hashish/dp/9607120078).)
