+++
title = "May Athena make you wise(er than I am)!"
description = ""
date = "2016-11-08T22:16:24+01:00"

+++
===

It took some time, but the blog section of the website is finally up –
albeit as a practice run. I will finalise it in a week or so, but until
then I may as well add some content.

I have decided to make the blog something of an aside to the website,
mainly because I don’t trust myself to keep to a regular blogging
schedule. However, I have big plans. Apart from my review of Nissim
Francez’s *Proof-theoretic semantics*, the first instalment of which
will go up tomorrow, here’s what else I have in store for you.

Lately, I have been thinking about *immigration and refugees* and
re-read Dummett’s book (*On immigration and refugees*). (Incidentally,
this is the only book on the topic I have ever read, so blogging about
this is gonna be a kind of ‘amateurs-gone-bonkers’ affair.) I will
report these thoughts.

I also have a blog post written in Romanian about a couple (?) of years
ago. I wrote it when the ‘refugees crisis’ hit its peak. At that time,
it was hard to tell who had the more disgusting attitude: the Romanian
government or the Romanian intelligentsia. What was clear is that they
were equally dumb, so I thought even my amateuresque intervention may
help. The post was never published. I sent it to a friend who was
running a nice (leftist) blogging platform, but he said pass, ostensibly
because it was too abstract. It is true that it was developing a
philosophical argument of sorts and I reckon you can’t go more abstract
than this if you want to write words, not formulae. So I’ll try to post
that here.

All this should keep me busy for a couple of weeks, provided I’ll find
the time/energy to get any busier than I already am.

A tout!
